---
title: Commons Club
description: open source as adjunct to proprietary software
layout: post
---

Pulled into social networks that manipulate and abuse us.
Drawn into marketplaces that sell data about us.  Hooked on
proprietary software we can't effectively opt out of.
Making proprietary software to hook other people.

Making proprietary software out of open source.

To software developers, today's hand-wringing about privacy,
security, and manipulation comes comically, pitiably late.
Software people know how software gets made, and why.  When
we jon up to mainstream networks, services, and apps, we
take steps, from privacy settings to browser extensions to
Tor, that come easily only to our kind.  But all-in, we know
they're but half-measures.  We're tech people, but we might
as well be plumbers or insurance brokers, as far as other
devs' apps are concerned.

Open source software is winning.  Software freedom, the
power to be both developer and user of the apps that matter
to you, is not.  If there were ever a short cased for a
difference, there it is.  You want to fix things.  You know
how to fix things.  You're not allowed to fix things.  Train
ten new programmers, they're not allowed to fix the tings,
either.

Perhaps open source doesn't belong in conversations about
user rights, privacy protections, transparency, choice.  But
it chooses not to belong.  Free software takes positions on
user-facing issues.  Open source takes positions on
user-facing issues only when the users facing the issues
happen to be programmers.

That's why open source "wins".  It wins, dilutely, as
adjunct to proprietary software development.  It's more
efficient to build proprietary code---social networks,
commercial networks, locked-in user communities---on open
source freebies.  But it's more profitable, so they say, to
offer users of those systems no meaningful rights to patch,
fork, or set policy.

It's tempting to avoid this reality by reassuring ourselves
that all software is open source these days, or nearly so,
because it's increasingly made of open source and made like
open source.  It's often true, at least chauvinistically,
that compared to the heavy intellectual lifting done in the
stack---often open---the layer of closed integration,
application, and design on top measures relatively thin.

But that's a distinction falling conveniently short of a
difference.  I can improve Facebook's front-end framework,
making it easier to change facebook.com, and creating more
developers Facebook can hire or acquire.  I can optimize
LinkedIn's database, making linkedin.com cheaper to run, and
fewer tickets for LinkedIn staff to handle.  But Facebook
isn't a front-end framework, and LinkedIn isn't a database.
Not really.  Not even close.

Even if sloughing away all the open source leaves but a thin
film of proprietary binding, that binding makes the choices
that meaningfully affect users.  Patches to that layer, to
the network itself, aren't welcome.  That's network-owner
prerogative.

Network-owner prerogative is a pervasive kind of power.
Networks are simple value propositions, but there's little
limit on how many folks can buy in.   Network propositions
compel less by what network owners offer than by what users
offer.  We'll abide a creepy social network to socialize
with the right people.  We'll abide a slimy market maker to
buy the rights product at the right price.

"Network effect" still has a new shine on it, and ties in
very strongly with Valley start-up culture.  But software
freedom advocates bid consciously for network power in 1989.
In specific domains, the GPL still reigns.  It's easier to
port GCC to your new architecture than to write a compiler
from scratch.  It's easier to tweak WordPress than to seed
you own blog-platform community.  Software freedom isn't so
much enforced in these domains, emphasis on force.  If is
and business are just better with free run of GPL software.
Even the utterly indifferent abide GPL conditions and GPL
politics for free code.

And that is exactly the promise of network power.  A free
software network affects not just the software that freedom
advocates writes, but software that anyone writes, and free
software advocates end up having to run, or have run on
them.  It affects incentives for nearly anyone writing
software in a domain touched by the network.  It affects
incentives for programmers and managers openly hostile to
software freedom.

The fatal flaw of network power, for freedom or for control,
is always hubris.  Hubris looks to accomplishments of the
past and position in the present, and forgets that present
value is always an estimate of future benefit.  Incumbency's
at risk as soon as you stop doing what made you the
incumbent, and start acting like an incumbent.

It's famously easy to topple incumbents in software.
Incremental costs are low, and with patents again in
decline, it's relatively easy to clone, reimplement, and
otherwise run with what you find.  That dynamic bites both
proprietary and software-freedom networks.  Software freedom
responded both to the closed nature of commercial code---no
source available, or only under nondisclosure agreement---as
well as proprietary rights---source available, but no
permission to change or build on it.  Techniques, standards,
conventions, and usability lessons from GCC or Linux end up
not just in proprietary compilers and kernels, but also
permissively licensed, freedom-indifferent alternatives like
LLVM and Fuschia.

That dynamic partially explains why so many stalwarts of the
GPL network feel ever more like legacy systems.  That's not
to say stagnant or doomed.  GPL software remains much of the
most mature and battle-tested, with the broadest supporting
constituencies.  But by a combination of license
obsolescence---most notably the ASP loophole---and
permissive licensing seeping down the stack---as with Go,
which compiles native binaries without external
libraries---erodes the freedom-for-code cost-benefit
proposition.  If freedom-preserving licenses impose friction
on those who might join a project's supporting constituency,
we should expect a trend toward permissive licensing over
time, at least as long as contributors and would-be
contributors remain indifferent to the goals copyleft
licenses suffer friction to achieve.
